## R Markdown

# Introduction

Malaria remains a major public health challenge in sub-Saharan Africa
despite decades of progress through vector control interventions.
Insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) and indoor residual spraying (IRS) have
been central to malaria control across the region, consistently reducing
human–vector contact and suppressing transmission (Hobbs *et al.*,
2023). ITNs have been reported to contribute to reductions of up to 50%
in malaria incidence and 20% in malaria mortality (Zikayo et *al.*,
2025), while IRS has been shown to reduce malaria incidence by
approximately 50% (Harrison, 2025). Regarding the mode of application,
ITNs are long-acting control tools that provide protection for up to
three years, whereas IRS is typically applied annually (Willson *et
al.*, 2015). Over the past two decades, ITNs have become the dominant
malaria prevention tool due to their scalability, cost-effectiveness,
and favorable safety profile (Batt *et al.*, 2015). During most of this
period, pyrethroids were the only WHO-recommended active ingredient for
ITNs and the main insecticide class used in IRS (WHO, 2020), a
constraint that simplified procurement and deployment but imposed strong
selective pressure on a single insecticide class (Moyes *et al.*, 2021).
Notably, pyrethroids have also demonstrated the highest overall
performance in malaria control compared to other insecticide classes
(Zhou *et al.*, 2022).

## 3- Insecticide resistance (mechanism, trend)

However, as ITN coverage expanded and usage intensified, resistance to
pyrethroids emerged rapidly and unevenly across Africa, producing
pronounced spatial and temporal heterogeneity in susceptibility among
major Anopheles vectors (Hancock *{et al.}*, 2020). In African
Anopheles, resistance arises through multiple, often co-occurring
mechanisms (Kinsinza *{et al.}*, 2017). Target-site mutations in the
voltage-gated sodium channel (Vgsc), commonly referred to as knockdown
resistance (kdr), reduce pyrethroid binding affinity and impair
knockdown efficacy. In parallel, metabolic resistance—driven by elevated
cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, glutathione S-transferases, and
esterases—enhances detoxification capacity and survival following
exposure (Khan et al., 2020). The prevalence of these mechanisms varies
by species, region, and time, and their frequencies can shift rapidly
under changing intervention pressures (Hancock, 2020; Kinsinza et al.,
2017).

Continental-scale syntheses that integrate WHO bioassay results with
molecular surveillance data (e.g., Vgsc genotype frequencies) have
revealed species-specific regional trends and heterogeneous resistance
trajectories, emphasizing the need for resistance-informed strategies
rather than uniform, one-size-fits-all approaches (Hancock, 2020).
Indoor insecticide-based interventions, particularly ITNs and IRS, tend
to suppress endophilic and anthropophilic vectors such as Anopheles
gambiae and An. coluzzii more strongly than the more exophagic An.
arabiensis, leading to measurable shifts in species composition that can
undermine the effectiveness of exclusively indoor tools and complicate
routine entomological monitoring (Sinka et al., 2016).

Because resistance alters both survival and behavioural responses after
insecticide contact, it is expected to reshape local vector abundance
and community composition. Modelling and field studies indicate that
ITNs can elicit divergent behavioural outcomes depending on their
deterrent, inert, or attractive properties. Deterrent ITNs reduce
mosquito entry and enhance personal protection but may decrease the
likelihood of mosquitoes contacting treated surfaces, thus limiting
community-level impact. Conversely, inert or attractive ITNs may
increase mosquito entry and contact rates, enhancing mortality and
reducing transmission when population-level coverage is high.

## 4- PROBLEM STATEMENT

Despite growing evidence of widespread insecticide resistance among
African malaria vectors, the development of new insecticidal compounds
is not considered a sustainable or immediate solution. The discovery and
formulation of novel insecticides is both time-consuming and costly,
often requiring several years of intensive research and validation.
Consequently, establishing robust spatiotemporal maps of insecticide
resistance is essential to guide decision-making and identify geographic
areas where the deployment of new products would yield the greatest
impact. Although insecticide resistance in African malaria vectors are
well documented and different models frameworks were developed,
insecticide resistance mapping remain uncertain. Previous studies, such
as those analyzing Vgsc-995S and Vgsc-995F mutations, focused on a
single target-site gene, revealing geographically structured patterns
and the influence of ITN coverage on allele frequencies (Hancock, 2022).
However, insecticide resistance is often polygenic, involving multiple
target-site and metabolic mechanisms that interact to influence species
composition, and relative abundance under realistic intervention
pressures. As a result, the relative contribution of An. arabiensis
often increases where indoor intervention pressure is high or where
resistance reduces indoor mortality. These shifts have practical
consequences: they can change biting times and locations, diminish the
impact of exclusively indoor tools, and complicate interpretation of
routine entomological indicators (e.g., indoor resting densities,
blood-feeding inhibition, and parity rates). And more, the duration of
cluster-randomized trials assessing vector-control efficacy is generally
considered too short to determine whether one insecticide resistance
management strategy outperforms another. However, their optimal
placement depends on local resistance profiles, coverage histories, and
vector ecology. Without an explicit framework linking genotype-informed
resistance to abundance responses under realistic deployment scenarios,
it is difficult to prioritize products, time their rotations, or
forecast downstream effects on transmission.

## 5- Research questions

To address gaps in understanding the interaction between resistance
evolution and vector control, this study explores three key questions: -
How has insecticide resistance been modeled over time? - How do
interventions and resistance influence changes in Anopheles abundance? -
How do resistance allele frequencies and phenotypic resistance vary
across time, species, and regions in Africa?

## 6- Research objectives

-   General objective

-   Specific objective

## 7- Literature review

explain the mechanism behind insecticide resistance and relative
abundance (why relative abundance)

how we measure insecticide resistance

modeling insecticide resistance

## 8- Research Methodology

\<\<\< Research plan \>\>\>

\<\<\< schedule activities \>\>\> - research budget

\<\<\< References \>\>\> Hobbs NP, Weetman D, Hastings IM. Insecticide
resistance management strategies for public health control of mosquitoes
exhibiting polygenic resistance: A comparison of sequences, rotations,
and mixtures. Evol Appl. 2023 Apr 5;16(4):936-959. doi:
10.1111/eva.13546. PMID: 37124088; PMCID: PMC10130562.

Bhatt, S., Weiss, D., Cameron, E. et al. The effect of malaria control
on Plasmodium falciparum in Africa between 2000 and 2015. Nature 526,
207–211 (2015). <https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15535>

Moyes, C.L., Lees, R.S., Yunta, C. et al. Assessing cross-resistance
within the pyrethroids in terms of their interactions with key
cytochrome P450 enzymes and resistance in vector populations. Parasites
Vectors 14, 115 (2021). <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-021-04609-5>
Khan S, Uddin MN, Rizwan M, et al. Mechanism of Insecticide Resistance
in Insects/Pests. Polish Journal of Environmental Studies.
2020;29(3):2023–2030. <doi:10.15244/pjoes/108513>.

Kisinza, W.N., Nkya, T.E., Kabula, B. et al. Multiple insecticide
resistance in Anopheles gambiae from Tanzania: a major concern for
malaria vector control. Malar J 16, 439 (2017).
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-017-2087-2>

Nwane, P., Etang, J., Chouaїbou, M. et al. Multiple insecticide
resistance mechanisms in Anopheles gambiae s.l. populations from
Cameroon, Central Africa. Parasites Vectors 6, 41 (2013).
<https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-3305-6-41> \<\<\< Declaration \>\>\>

Zikayo Amulaga R. (2025). A Review of the Efficacy of
Insecticide-Treated Bed Nets in Reducing Malaria Incidence among
Children under Five in Rural Sub-Saharan Africa. INOSR Scientific
Research 12(1):1-5. <https://doi.org/10.59298/INOSRSR/2025/12.1.1500>

Harrison Cole, 2025. stopmalarianow.org,
<https://stopmalarianow.org/evaluating-the-effectiveness-of-indoor-residual-spraying-in-malaria-endemic-regions/#what-is-indoor-residual-spraying-and-its-role-in-malaria-control>

Zhou Y, Zhang WX, Tembo E, Xie MZ, Zhang SS, Wang XR, Wei TT, Feng X,
Zhang YL, Du J, Liu YQ, Zhang X, Cui F, Lu QB. Effectiveness of indoor
residual spraying on malaria control: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Infect Dis Poverty. 2022 Jul 23;11(1):83. doi:
10.1186/s40249-022-01005-8. PMID: 35870946; PMCID: PMC9308352

This is an R Markdown document. Markdown is a simple formatting syntax
for authoring HTML, PDF, and MS Word documents. For more details on
using R Markdown see <http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com>.

When you click the **Knit** button a document will be generated that
includes both content as well as the output of any embedded R code
chunks within the document. You can embed an R code chunk like this:

``` r
summary(cars)
```

    ##      speed           dist       
    ##  Min.   : 4.0   Min.   :  2.00  
    ##  1st Qu.:12.0   1st Qu.: 26.00  
    ##  Median :15.0   Median : 36.00  
    ##  Mean   :15.4   Mean   : 42.98  
    ##  3rd Qu.:19.0   3rd Qu.: 56.00  
    ##  Max.   :25.0   Max.   :120.00

## Including Plots

You can also embed plots, for example:

![](research_proposal_files/figure-markdown_github/pressure-1.png)

Note that the `echo = FALSE` parameter was added to the code chunk to
prevent printing of the R code that generated the plot.
